Where have you been born?
I was born in Ukraine, shtetl Ternivka 1922, in Oktober.
Which year?
Eee   nineteen twenty two.
OK.
In 1940 I graduated from the secondary school. And   I went to the Red Army. The Red Army.
To the Red Army?
Red Army.
?]
In 1940. In 1940, November 1940 I went to the Red Army.
Yes.
First, I served in Daugavpils, Latvia, and then in Minsk.
Ant there the war began. It was in 1922, I was near Minsk. 50 km between Minsk and Baranovitch.
Uhm
And then, we were   eee   we withdrew
I understood.
We started to withdraw from Minsk, we were eee   near Berezina, I was an artilleryman
- heavy artillery! At Berezina - river Berezina - we got heavy   eer
(Kempfn ?  - fighting / Kegn ?  - against)
Kkk   the Germans, we knocked down seven tanks.
What did he say?
By the river, it’s
Berezina?
Yes.
Berezina.
They   they resisted very well and seven tanks they had there.
OK, try not to intervene, you intervened with a word, he can find it himself, yeah?
OK.
Try.
Yeah
Then we were   with aviators, we’ve been bombed heavily
Yes.
And at Mogilov
between Mogilov and Smolensk
Smolensk?
I became a prisoner of war.
Yes.
I was wounded, I had an injury. I became a prisoner o war. Then we were   from
the general camp for 70-80 000 prisoners of war, Jews were picked up.
Yes.
If somebody walked away from the Jews, he was shot. Russians - out!, Jews   ee   Ukrainians - out!,
and Jews should go out. Well - I think - I do not resemble a Jew, all the Jews resemble me.
What? What did he say? Last words?
Eer   how did you say that?
I am not   eee   I am not like a Jew. I do not look like a Jew. But all the Jews look like me.
I do not look like a Jew but all the Jews look like me.
OK, I understood you, yeah.
I left. We left, 230 Jews. We were taken to the Minsk camp in the street
How many?
Eee   32
Ok.
Camp. Concentration camp, SS concentration camp   eee   work camp in Minsk.
Yes.
From those 32   230 Jews - prisoners of war - eee   till March 1942, maybe 15 people remained.
Yes, I understand.
The rest died - from hunger, from cold, from   Then more Jews were brought
from   eee   1942 Timoshenko lost   Budyonny lost   he lost the battle.
What did he say?
Budyonny, Budyonny - he lost the battle.
OK.
Two armies clashed in the field. More Jews were brought to us. Only
Jews were being brought to our camp. It was a camp for Jewish
Prisoners of war.
OK.
In 1943, September 1943, we were (taken) from Minsk, from the camp and
from the Minsk ghetto we were gathered in   eee   wagons   trains
Eeer   trains, the
Trains, yes!
Eeer   trains.
Trains!
Yyy   They put him on the trains.
200 people per a wagon. And then we were taken to Poland.
And in Poland we travelled three more days.
Yes.
And in the dawn! On the 4th day, very early, we were taken   to a camp. The wagons entered the camp.
We didn’t know yet what kind of a camp it was, not at all. We got out from
the wagon   eee   onto a square. A German told us - he was standing on a table
- and he said: “Plumbers and locksmiths”   locksmith is a
Eem   Schlosser   (Ger.: locksmith)
Please, say it in English. It is impossible   Say it in English, please.
Yes, but I have forgotten the   the name.
Plumber.
OK. Say it in German.
Schlosser is a
Sleutelmaker (Nl.)
Sleutelmaker (Nl.), yes.
He sad he was a locksmith.
And plumber. Plumbers and locksmiths.
(Go) out! Yes.
they went out. We were three friends. We   became very good friends in Minsk]: me, Sasha
Kuptchin and Grisha Pechersky. Grisha says: “I’m a locksmith - I’m going out”.
Sorry
Eer   why   they were three friends. One of them said: “I’m
a sleutelmaker” (Nl.: locksmith) and he went out.
Please, no Dutch on the tape.
Yes.
It’s impossible to transcribe it.
were a
Please, try not to
But I have not the   the   the
OK, OK, the key-maker.
the   key-maker
OK, sorry, OK sorry, sorry.
Yad-Vashem]! In Yad-Vashem there is my cassette. It’s all translated to English.
I know.
Everything is described. I talked about everything, three hours!
I’m telling you now: when you speak all the languages together, I won’t find people,
who will translate it. It must be two languages. Or three: German, English
I understand.
Yeah? And if also Dutch gets involved, it becomes impossible to ask. Yes. OK.
They went out, Grisha   they went out   They were taken out. Where?
I don’t know. Then he said: “Carpenters - go out!”
Timbermen.
Yes.
I was   (  .[?  I wasn’t   I was none of these. I didn’t
go out. But Sasha Kuptchin - the friend of mine
I had no profession.
Yes.
I couldn’t say that I am a plumber, or a timberman, so
Sasha Kuptchin tells me: “My father is a carpenter, come with me, you will help me”. I say
So you are a carpenter?
I did not to out. He went out. And something happened to me: I got a
I was drenched with sweat, some power told me: “Go out! Go out!”
Eer, I had no profession but something in me yearned to go
out and I was all in sweat, I was covered in sweat. And?
I raised my hand and shouted: I’m a glazier!
I’m a glazier. Yes?
The German who was registering came to me. He says - he stands like this, o!
- “Are you a communist?” I say: “No! I’m too young” I was then   mmm
eee   twenty years old! “I’m too young.” “Out, damn pig!”
I went out. I was together with Sasha. Seventy
Sasha Pechersky?
No, Sasha Kuptchin, my friend.
Yes.
Pechersky also went out.
Eighty people went out as carpenters. And I was a glazier - out as well. We were led not for
a long time - 10-15 minutes. They seated us away   we sat on the ground four, five or six hours.
None of us knew anything. Nobody came to us. Then we were given coffee with bread.
Aha.
And we ask: Where did all the people from the transport go? There were 2000 people.
OK, what did he say?
And we asked: “Where are the other people that were with us?” 2200 people.
They say: “ A, there” they say “([?  comes smoke - this are your people”. We
understood where we were. We were there   mmm   we were there 22 days. People who lived
already many years in Sobibor, no   not many years   one and a half year.
What did he say?
There were people, er   year and a half there.
They thought: how can we escape?
They say: with whom shall we plan it? A, we came, the Jewish prisoners of war,
soon they had Petchersky - he was older than us - 14, 13 years older.
Pechersky was 14 years elder than they, they were, er, prisoners of war.
We made a committee. A plan how to escape.
A plan how to escape, they made.
Yes.
They, they made a committee.
On October 14, it was on the 21st day after we came to Sobibor.
21 days after he came here.
I was sent to a carpenter’s shop - to work.
Uhm.
In the afternoon I was left in the carpenter’s shop.
There came Petchersky to the carpenter’s shop.
Uhm
I understood that there will be   it will be hot
Eehm   they came to the timber   er   plant and Pechersky arrived. Also all other
people. And he understood that now it will be  er   will be something.
He took me to the side and told me that at four o’clock should
come   to the carpenter’s shop   eee   Karl Frenzel.
Yes.
Can I, with an axe   kill him. I say: yes. I stand in the window, in the carpenter’s shop.
Pechersky stands by my side. We’re waiting for Frenzel to come. But Frenzel did not come.
Whoof!
I know.
From four till five we were supposed to   eee   kill all the Germans.
What? German what?
In the
Yyy   ve   he had to kill.
Yes.
It was cold   in the carpenter’s shop   I was (cold). And eee   where one makes
Tailor’s shop? Clothes. Tailor’s shop.
Shubayev and another friend. And where one makes shoes - there was   Arkadiy Vayspapir with Lerner.
Ja.
And to the other camp, where there were four Germans, Tsybulsky was sent. In the second   in
the second camp. He was supposed kill them between four and five. Frenzel did not come, already
four o’clock, on a horse, rode to the first camp - it all happened in the first camp.
All this happened in the first camp.
Yes.
I will draw you   I will draw you how
I know
I will draw you how it
I know.
A?
You know?
I know the   geography.
A! A   yes? Good. In the first camp there was such a gate   it was   eee   not the commander, the
commander was (called) Berg, he was not there on that day. But Neumann, the one who told me: “Out,
damn pig!”. Neumann]! On a horse (he) came to the camp, rode to - where one makes
Clothes.
clothes, and got off the horse, came inside. It was the   the last minute of his life.
Yes.
There he   eer   put on the coat to try it on
What does he say?
He put on the
The jacket, yes?
The   the jacket.
Yes
And   eeer.
Shubayev.
And this was his last moment.
Shubayev (hit) him with an axe in the back, but he did not hit hard. He gave
a shout. The horse heard his scream, stood up on his two legs, the horse
He did not   er   he cried out and the horse heard and stood up (..?.) on both his legs.
We saw everything from   the window   what is happening because we had the   From the window
we saw everything, because there was an office in the carpenter’s shop. It looked normally
but then there were two people in the other cell: Shubayev and another one. He finished,
everything was (happening) outside the tailor’s (shop), he took the horse between the
barracks. Neumann’s pistol was brought and given to Petchersky.
Et  e   they took the horse away. The, the pistol   Neumann   the
Neumann’s pistol they took   Er   it was given to Pechersky.
To the   where one makes shoes   Germans came   to the tailor’s shop
Germans came, everything was in order. In the second camp Petchersky made
no   Tsybulsky made order - four Germans. In the second camp.
Yes.
Five o’clock, work in the camp ends. Everybody comes to the Appellplatz and we are being counted.
But the Germans were already among   11 Germans were already dead. Who should count?
11 Germans   er   were already dead.
And Frenzel was not in the camp. Frenzel was not (there). So I did not conduct the order. He came
later, when we begun to   We took all the people out on the Appellplatz at five o’clock, October
14, five o’clock. Shubayev overheard that Tsybulsky goes in the second camp and sings a song.
It means: everything is in order. The four Germans from the second camp are dead. Shubayev took
out the pistol, he did not shoot, but he shouted: For the homeland, for Stalin]!
Which is? Translate, please.
It is Russian.
He shouted: for the homeland, for Stalin]!
For the   for our fatherland and for a   for Stalin.
OK.
Ahead!
I ran with an axe in my hand, I went through the gate, went
between the officers’   when they were shooting
(..?.)
I was running.
Yes.
I ran to the wire.
And I wanted, with the axe
He wanted to   do with his axe   to cut
The wire.
I threw away the axe, I climbed three meters   but (  .[?  tore my overalls a little.
Of course. Nice overalls.
I ran, fell, ran, fell, ran, fell, run   like a soldier   I was a soldier   ran, fell, ran,
fell, into the forest. I looked here, I think: what is it that something hurts in my foot.
His feet   were   er
And only then his he   his leg begin to hurt.
OK.
I had a look - a bullet went through from here
‘A koyl’?
A bullet
A bullet hurt him, yeah
But the foot   the leg was intact.
OK.
I did not think at all, (at the ) beginning of the next day we were all together. There were
50 people there. 50 people. All together. (..?.) The police from around and around
The police with a fifty people, fifty men and we ran all together. We couldn’t
It was
Because   because the police began to round us up.
There were 50 people in our place. A lot (more) ran away. But there, where I was - 50 people.
Where he was, there were fifty. But there were many more.
Alone   Aviators were looking and searching.
Yes, I know.
We decided among us that there are too many people. We should
divide into small   There was me, Dov Freyberg there   who
Yes, yes.
died two years ago, one more boy from Radom
Yes.
We left.
The three of you.
Three.
Yes.
We were walking 15 days.
On foot.
Eeeee
We were walking 15 days.
Fifty days.
Fifteen days, yes.
We were nearby Chelm, 5 km from Chelm in the forest, we
met two brothers who escaped from the Chelm execution.
What’s ‘egzookotsye’?
Eee  they at the forest near Chelm they found two brothers who, who escaped from execution.
Yes. Which execution?
Near Chelm there were
On that day all Jews from Chem were killed. And they ran away.
They shot everybody from Chelm, the Jews. And these two boys ran away.
OK, OK. I understand.
A   This is one of them. It is Dov Freyberg. I took this (photo). I was in a hospital, in Lodz.
Moment, moment.
Sorry.
(photo shown from 21’26’’ to 21’53’’)
It was in 1945. In March 1945 it (the photo) was taken in Lodz.
This is picture number one.
Yes. On the left is - who? Who are these people, on the left it’s
It is me.
Here.
This is Dov Freyberg (Pakoynyi.[? . He’s also dead already. Two brothers:
Maniek and Jozek from Chelm. This is Jozek, he died in Israel.
And on the right? And the others?
I don’t know. This was a friend. I don’t   I met him
(  )
I met him
OK, so you met him?
You met these two brothers?
These two brothers. There lived   eee   With the four of them - Czechoslovakian
Jews, they escaped from another camp. Four Jews who ran away from our camp
joined us three  days later. We were back in 15 days.
There they met four guys from Czechoslovakia who ran away from another
camp and four   eee   of  from Sobibor who arrived three days later.
Can he   Can you please ask him to look a little bit at me?
And now   look at her   hehehe
Yes. Good. In   eee   in the forest there was a bunker hidden under ground.
Yes.
When we came with the three of us, the bunker was already too small. We made a new bunker. One-two
kilometers from the old one. If one is caught (found), the other would be able   Nine people moved
to the new bunker and four Jews from Sobibor stayed in the old bunker. Bandits attacked the four Jews
and three were killed and one came to us, to our bunker. He looks.. we should.. help.
Emm
So.
There, there were two bunkers   bu, bunkers.
Bunkers
Bunkers.
One group stayed behind, yeah?
And one the   gangs went into one of them and killed three people. So the   one of them ran
away to their bunker and said: “we have to do something to help them, to help”.
We were running away, three people were lying dead. We buried them, made
a funeral. It’s what one should do. And then there was January
Eee   one moment  . When they came
They made a funeral.
They made a funeral as was proper, for the three of them.
January 1944, snow fell as well. The first snow.
Yes. It was cold there.
Maniek and Jozek went to the Poles for bread.
Yes
They had a lot of familiar Poles who gave us bread.
They left   traces on the snow.
Traces, yes.
Our bunker was found   We were attacked   Two Czechoslovakian
Jews were killed   Kornishon and Shnabel.
They found
What happened to the Cz   sl   Czechs?
Two of them were killed. They  they found
The traces, yes
Yes, the traces   so two of them were killed by  by gangs   of the   from the Czechoslovaks.
Kornishon and Shnabel. They were   We buried them and left   into the
forest   We were   we split. The two Czechoslovakian Jews went to Czechoslovakia
I don’t know where they   Zilberman wrote to me
Sorry, what did he say?
Er   They separated and they went into the forest. And the  e.. the Czechs..ee.. went back to
Czechoslovakia and he says that after the war he came   ee  he got letters from Zilberman.
On July 6, 1944 the Russian army liberated Lodz   eee   Chelm. I went to the commanding
officer of Chelm and said: I was a   a soldier, a Russian soldier, from the Russian
army. I am a prisoner of war, I want to go back to the army.
He came back, he went to Chelm.
What's a "zelner"?
Zelner - Soldat. Soldier.
Soldier.
I want to be a soldier again.
It was July six   eee   forty four 1944. July 1944. I was sent   I was questioned
Two weeks I was   Many people questioned me: how did I become   why did
I become a prisoner of war, how did I become a prisoner of war.
Yes. Of course.
They thought that I was a policeman. I told them about my experiences from Sobibor. They understood
that I am a right man, I’m not a fraud. I was sent back to the army. Three   eee   360 division.
Ja.
29 army. I crossed the Vistula. I was already a soldier.
What is Visla?
Vistula, the river Vistula. In Poland.
He went through the Vistula. To Poland.
What's Vistula?
The river Vistula.
It’s a big river in Poland.
Yes, I know.
And we swam through Vistula and in Polaba, which is a town in Poland, we made a bridgehead.
This is the river and here we crossed the river and here we  erected a bridgehead - 14
km wide and 35 km deep. We fortified there and we did not move any further.
They went over the Vistula and they conquered the place of so
and so kilometers and there they stood and did not move.
We stayed at the bridgehead till January 14, 1945.
Yes.
On January 14, 1945 we went further.
Further in Poland.
Poland. My division went to Poznan   Poznan. First we were sent to Krakow and then we were switched
to Poznan. In Poznan there was a big   fortress (he says it in Russian)   In Yiddish
In Hebrew?
Misha, how is a fortress in Hebrew?
[Brest   a fortress
A fortress.
I understand.
A castle.
It was the fortress of Poznan.
What’s Poznan?
A fortress.
Eee   A place which is armoured around.
Fortified. Yes.
Armon! (Rus.??.[?
Armoured castle, yes.
Amon. Ja.
There on January 19 I was wounded. It was in Poznan. They wanted to
amputate my fingers. They had gangrene, my fingers had gangrene.
It’s a grenade.
Here the bullet entered and here it left. They had gangrene. I went
to the hospital and I was discharged at the end of April.
In the end of April he was released from hospital.
to Berlin. I wasn’t an active soldier any more. I was already a Нестроевой (Rus.)   not
He was not an active soldier any more because  he was injured.
(  .[?  they did not allow me to be with   In Berlin I was in Truppenwirtschaftslager
Ger.: troops supply camp. I was a manager of the security which was there. For the
army,  for the Russian army there was a lot of flour, marmalade with
Ah, yes.
SpM Truppenwirtschaftslager.
He was not an active soldier any more but he was in the warehouse. He had  to
Sort.
To sort, yes.
SpM I was   the manager of the security. Of the
Yes. He was the control   He was in the control of it.
In October, at the end of October, November 1944 I was released.
He was released   end of October.
Well there, I already wet to my place, to Ternivka, I went to the grave
there, then I went to a town, which   I was a photographer   I was
He was a photographer and he went back to his place.
Well, I went to
To Ukraine?
In 1975 I went to Odessa. In 1945 I went to Odessa.
Odessa?
Yes. And from Odessa in 1990 I came here. Together with my sons, with grandchildren.
And in year 1990 he came back from Odessa, he came to Israel
with all his family - his wife and his children
(  .[?
and his grandchildren. So this is the story.
I would like to understand the (  .[?  more specifically.
What does she want to know?
How (  ?  with your village in Ukraine? Talk about your village, please.
About your village.
Ternivka. It was a Jewish shtetl. It was   Jewish tailors, merchants. A lot! Tailors, merchants.
There was a windmill. Two windmills. There was a   where one makes   grupn (Rus..[?  From
all around people used to come to Ternivka   People used to live not a bad life.
Lived well?
Well.
Yes.
There was a market.
A market.
A market. A big market. People from other villages (people) used to come to the market. Flour, ?
, cheese, everything, everything Jews used to buy. It was good for them, it was good for us.
Aha.
But the Germans came, they said: all the Jews stay here.
These are the people who remained   these are from Ternivka?
This is Ternivka. These are the Jews who survived
]
After the war?
After the war.
After the was. It was year 1960.
Year 1960.
1960.
Picture two is an image of   what's the name of the village?
Ternivka.
Of Ternivka. It's picture two.
It’s Vinnica region. Ukraine, Vinnica region.
It's Ukraine, Vinnica?
Vinnica.
Vinnica region.
Vinnica. It is a town of our
Yes. And it’s  the inhabitants of the village which remained in 1946. Tell me,
did you have good relations with your neighbours? Your Ukrainian neighbours? Were
you friendly with your Ukrainian neighbours? Not Jewish, Ukrainian.
What were your relations with the Ukrainian population   eee   neighbours?
Good. Good. Everything fine.
(  )
My father was a tailor. He had a lot of work. There was one tailor
in each village and my father’s village was called Viknene.
What’s a Viknene?
Viknene. It’s a village, Viknene.
There was a place, a village. It’s a name of a village.
A village   a   Viknene.
I remember that in 1932 I went to   There was nothing to eat in Ukraine   there was   famine!
In the year 1932 there was huger in Ukraine, it was the hunger period and
You went to  ?
With my father I walked 10 km. I was 10 years old. We went on foot to Veiknene
and there already   there was already fresh bread. We ate a little.
He travelled 10 km to get bread?
10 km and he was a 10 years old child. He went with his father to the village
and here was already bread, fresh bread, and they brought it.
So   How many brothers and sisters did you  ? How many   How many brothers and sisters did you have?
How many brothers and sisters did you have?
I had two sisters. But they   One sister was in Kazakhstan   They survived.
The other sister   In Dalny Vostok her husband was a soldier, she moved to Vladivostok.
They survived. My sisters survived. They died after the war.
And your parents?
And parents?
My parents lie there.
This is the memory for them.
Yes.
The whole family lies there. All, all of them lie.
Ehm   You will have to translate now. I want him to talk about his Friday evening
in his house. About going to school. Can he start to try to do that?
Can you tell us how the Friday evening used to look at your home?
How you went to the synagogue. Simply, how your life looked.
Life   In 1930 I was in a Jewish school. In 1930 I went to the first   the first   grade.
In the first grade. In a Jewish school. There, in the Jewish school, I learnt till 1936.
I want to ask   I want to ask
What?
A Jewish school is where you learnt Yiddish or Hebrew?
No! Yiddish]!
Please, don’t do this! This is absolutely
Yiddish]! We have not been taught Hebrew in our school.
I have understood so please, don't   I know the region. Please. Sorry.
OK.
Yes?
In 1936 I graduated from the Jewish school and I moved to an Ukrainian school.
1937?
1936. In 1936 I graduated from the Jewish school and all Jews went to the Ukrainian school.
Why?
They made the Jews do it. The Jewish school   It has been said: enough!
In the year 1936 he went to the  Ukrainian
1937 to the Ukrainian school.
Because
Yes. OK?
Because   eee   they said it's enough. Now you go to
Who said? Who said it's enough?
Who said that you have to
Stalin said   It’s everything from Stalin.
It was from above.
From above. Emmm   Please can you talk about the difference between the two schools.
And what was the difference between these two schools? Between the Jewish
Here one learnt Yiddish and there we learnt only Ukrainian and Russian.
But were there also non-[Jewish children in class? Was it more mixed?
It was mixed. In our class there were 8 Jews. The rest was Ukrainian.  And it was
we used to    there was nothing between us. The headmaster was a Jew]! He graduated
from an university, a Russian university. He taught us mathematics.
I understood.
A Jew.
Mhm.
Later there was an Ukrainian, Kovaltchuk. Everything was fine.
We learnt together, everything fine.
No anti-semitism?
No. Maybe hidden inside there was.
Perhaps inside there was but not outside.
There was a discipline. People were afraid.
Mhm.
Before the war some Jews were important people. Later   Stalin (  .[?  drove Jews out.
It was forbidden. Anti-semitism was forbidden by the authorities. And
the Jews had good positions. Only after the war things changed.
OK, so let us come back to Friday evening to family life.
Friday evening at home. How did it look?
It was not a big room at our place   My father was a tailor. There was a big room where he used
to work   There was an alcove. I was sleeping on a couch   And in the alcove there were two beds.
And between them there stood a table. And there was light. On friday evening my mother used to
come inside, light the candles. So I think every Friday evening she used to bless
Every Friday she would lit the candles and also when the
beginning of the   of a month she would also pray.
Mhm. Was it religious upbringing? Was it religion?
Was it a religious upbringing?
What is it?
A religious home?
No, it wasn’t a religious home, not a religious one   On Yom Kippur, Rosh Hashanah,
Pesach we used to   go to the synagogue. Otherwise not. Not a religious home   Eee
home. Only  on Friday evening our mother used to light the candles.
It wasn't a religious home but Friday evening they would put on the lights and Rosh Hashanah,
Yom Kippur and Pesach they went to shib Yid.   to the shul Yid.   to the synagogue]
You just told that you were ten when the “big hunger” was there. He was
ten years old when the “big hunger” was there. Just translate, please.
You were there when the “big hunger” was there when you were ten years old.
Yes. In 1932.
Yes. Well, how did you talk about it? Did you know it was part of Soviet policy or?
How did you understand it? Did you understand that it was a Soviet policy? How did you
I did not understand the reason at all! I knew that there is no rain. There was
no rain. It was so dry!  There was no rain so there was nothing to eat.
He understood there were no rains and therefore the wheat did not grow.
One couldn’t do anything   It was   The  fields were  empty. There was hunger.
There was no rain.
How did you   Did you know about communism?
I haven’t thought about the communism, not at all. The small shtetl   what communism
It was   Afterwards I understood, after the war I understood everything.
After the war he understood communism but not when he was in the village.
OK, so did you know the Germans were dangerous?
But did you know that Germans are dangerous?
I knew. I knew, movies have been shown such as: “Family Oppenheimer”, “Professor
Mamlock”. There were movies, we saw them before the war, we knew what
He knew because there were movies.
Well, what could we have done?
Movies.
Yes? Talk what did he more say? He had
"Professor Mamlock"
What is that?
A movie.
“Family Oppenheimer”, movies which existed before the war.
"Oppenheimers"
They have been shown before the war, these movies. Russian movies
in which it was shown how in Germany Jews are being beaten.
There were Soviet movies which showed what they do to the Jews in Germany. How they bit them.
Nobody left straight from Ternivka because there was no railroad. Ternivka, shtetl Ternivka.
The Jews stayed, because they could not run away. The railroad was 30 km from Ternivka.
From Ternivke they could not run away because the
train
railways were not there. Only thirty kilometer
Therefore, the Jews stayed. There was no possibility to escape.  I wasn’t
there   I was in the army and my sisters were not at home either.
Was it normal for a Jewish boy to go to the army?
Why not? I was a patriot! I was defending   I was a patriot!
How old were you?
Eighteen. In 1940 I was 18 years old. I went to the army.
I understand. OK. How was it in the army?
How was it in the army?
It was very hard in the army.
Why?
Like in any army   Hard. Later we got used to it. I was a soldier, not a bad one.
And   it was hard but he got used to it, like in any army.
Can you tell a little more? Why was it hard?
Can you maybe tell us more? What were the hardships?
Cold?
Hardships   Do I know what a hardship is?  Life is a hardship, isn’t
it? (  .[?  That everything passes - it is a hardship! Poverty!
Did you have enough food in the army?
In Ternivka? In the army? Good. Good food.
And (..?.) food as well?
And   kosher?
No. No kosher  food. No. No kosher. In the army we were getting all the same.
Ja.
There were from Turkey   Turkish Jews, well, from Reza   no, Rezanya
Reza
Grozny, there were    Islamic
There were Jews from Georgia.
Jews from there were eating everything, just like me. There was no choice.
They ate everything. There was no choice.
Nothing kosher. All the same.
OK. When you for the first time heard of the German army? When was
this? When did he heard for the first time of the German army?
When did you hear for the first time of the German army?
The German army? I heard everything when they occupied Austria , when they occupied
Czechoslovakia   I knew everything   I read newspapers   Everything
I knew everything because I read the papers.
That was not my question.
So?
Sorry, it's OK. When did he   When did his department of the army for the first meet Germans?
A! When did you come into contact with the Germans? For the first time.
For the first time?
In the army.
In the army I wasn’t in contact   I came into contact when I was already a prisoner of war.
In the army when he was he was not in contact with the Germans. Only when he was a prisoner of war.
How was he made
I was an artilleryman. I was shooting from afar
Yes. Where? Where?
Where? Berezina, there was heavy shooting, we destroyed seven
tanks. Panzers, seven Panzers we destroyed. Berezina.
Can he please   I'm trying   What is happening now is that we're getting into this
answer and question and you really have to avoid this. Can he please try to start
talking how he was taken prisoner of war in as much detail as he can remember.
How did it happen   How did you become   you became a prisoner of war? How did it happen?
It happened between Mogilov and Smolensk. A bomb has fallen not far away. I was injured,
a contusion of   A piece of the bomb   iron hit me here, in the foot   But it didn’t cut
off      I had a wound, it got infected. And this is how I became a prisoner of war.
And   Can he talk further how it happened   He must talk, please, ask him
Please ask him to talk, don't get him to this question and answer play.
You were wounded.
Yes.
And   And then came
We were brought, driven to Minsk   to Minsk   In Minsk there was a (..?.) camp for 80000 prisoners
of war. In Minsk. We were divided: Russians - out!, Ukrainians - out!, Jews went out. I already
told, 230 Jews left, they were brought to the Minsk camp on Szeroka street.
How was it in the camp?
How   Tell us about the camp . Tell us about the Minsk camp.
I’m telling. While in the camp, we used to receive food once a day. No bread, not at all. A
lot of people died from hunger. Until spring 1942 maybe 15 Jews remained from the total 230.
And then?
Then   Then more Jews were brought   We started to work, we started to get better food. And after
work we used to get a bit of potatoes. Life became a bit easier, nobody was dying from hunger.
In spring 1942 everybody was getting food. We used to go   work   We were receiving food.
I do have a last question before I suggest to stop.
One more   One more question before
When you went to the army, did you see your parents for the last time?
Yes, it was November 1940. I said goodbye to them. We did not see each other later
Please, tell me. How did it happen?
How did it happen? The
November came, we   with a paper from the War Committee division   I came to a division   I
was sent   I came to Daugavpils, Latvia. It was November 1940. It has just been decided for
our soldiers to be sent to Latvia and I came to Latvia. Daugavpils in November 1940.
And how   Where were your parents when you?
Where were your parents?
They stayed in Ternovka.
They remained in Ternovka.
stayed in Ternivka.
Were they in the room or in the gate or   Did they stand in the
door, in the room? Tell me, please! Where were they? Where?!
They remained at home.
Where?
What does she want?
Where did they   Where did they stay, the parents?
In their room.
In the room.
But
In their room!
But when he did see them for the last time   Where?
When you saw them for the last time.
In November 1940.
Where were they?
In the room. In the room. I left and they stayed in the room.
And you really said goodbye.
And then you said
I didn’t tell them anything   Who could have known
that we will be sent and will receive an order now
Who could have   He left, who could have saw that it would be the last time.
We didn’t know that we will have to fight on the territories of the enemy.
Who could have thought about it that he will afterwards have to fight on territoria of the enemy.
Yes.
Pause. Pause. I take a picture of you now.
I am already a bit tired and would like to finish.
I believe so.
and finish   Say it, we’re finishing
I came   I was told that to Khoschevato, a town, there came my father’s brother.
This is his daughter. We met. She came back from the army. I met her, we had a wedding
on January 15, 1946. We had a wedding and we live, thanks God, till today.
He went back to the shtetl?
You went back to the shtetl?
What?
After the war, did you come back to the shtetl?
I haven’t been in Ternivka for a long lime because those people
were dead. I went to Khoschevato to my uncle, there I met
He did not remain in the village, in Ternivka, because
no one remained there so he went to his uncle in  ?
Where was it?
Khoschevato. Shtetl Khoschevato.
There he met his wife. His   her whom he married
In January 1946?
In 1946.
And they married.
She’s Jewish?
Is she Jewish?
Yes! Her father is Yosl
(..?.) eyes! Haha!
Yosl.
Her father   Her father is Yosl and
Her mother’s brother, my father. He is Moyshe.
And they are connected in the family.
It’s my second   my sister   second line   Her father - my father were brothers.
They're cousins.
Und   Wie war das   Wie heisst die   What's the name of the village where she lived?
In which shtetl did she live?
She was living in Khoschevato.
In Khoschevato. There.
It was 20 km from Ternivka, 30 km from Ternivka. 30 km from Ternivka.
And was she also in a concentration camp?
No, she was a soldier, she was a soldier in the army!
a soldier.
Misha, show mother’s war-time photograph!
I would like to take photos, of course!
There, under the glass. Go on.
SpM Should I tell them already that they need to finish soon?
I already told them.
She’s beautiful!
[voice of the son in the background]
No. I already have a headache. Enough.
She’s leaving on Tuesday.
What kind of a person was it? What kind of a man was it?
It was a good organizer, Pechersky. After the war I found   I didn’t know that he is alive.
I didn’t know that Pechersky is alive. I found Pechersky in 1963. In 1963 I found out
that Pechersky is alive. I found out that Vayspapir is alive. I went to Rastov, there we
met. They visited me in Gayvoron where I worked 25 years.. Gayvoron was a town of 20000
people. I worked 25 years in Gayvoron. Before Odessa, I worked in Gayvoron.
I’ve been in my townmany times. I was in Rastov. There in 1963 we organized a 20th anniversary
of the uprising. In 1978 we organized the 25th anniversary of the uprising.
Was it a good man?
Pechersky? He was a good man. His (..?.) was not Jewish but Russian but he was a good person.
[break]
[?] Er, exactly what you need, because he can’t do it for a long time,
so he wants to, er, exactly what, what you still need, what is that
Well I love to, of course, to know what’s on the pictures, it’s unexpected,
and I had two questions, I told them to you. I first would like to talk a
little bit about his life after he was  after the war was ended.
And I want to talk a little bit about this picture of forty-six,
about the survivors that he explains to me who they are.
This one?
No it’s this one, the one he showed me yesterday.
She has  She will be glad to talk also about the photograph(s) and, if there will
be time left, or if you’re comfortable with it, but I have two of those big, two,
two big, big interests. She would like to know about your life after the war.
After the war.
So
That’s one thing, and another: yesterday you showed her (a) picture(s) of year, the year 1946,
there’s a group of people, and she would like to know something about them, if you can.
A group of people, that’s  in Ternovka’s
Yes
graveyard
yes, yes
so, er, these are Jews, who stayed alive
yes
eeer, after the war,
and she
they were, some were in the army, me, others were, (some) were evacuated, had come back
a
and they already didn’t live in Ternovka, they had just come to the day, when there had been
executions, the 27th of May, 1942, for that day we used to gather there in the graveyard.
a
They had come from several cities, and  into the Soviet Union.
One second. Тhe picture he showed you at the graveyard, this is the one you’re talking about, he says,
it has, it’s the picture of people who survived, but they didn’t live there, it’s, er, every day,
every year they used to come on the, on 25th of May, er, it was the day that they, er, er, had er, execution
or something like that, and in, in the memory of, of that execution they, they all got together, all
the people who survived, and they survived because of different ways, in different ways, some were in
the, in the army already, some were evacuated from there, but as a, as to remember and to commemorate
they get together, er, every year, er, to, er, to commemorate this date.
You don’t have to make it so long, right.
OK.
I understand.
I, I just want to know if he knows people on that picture.
Ahem.
She  she would like to know if, whom do you know in this photo.
I know everyone.
He knows everyone.
OK. I want to talk about it, but first I would like to start ]
Many of them are no longer alive, many died there.
I, I want him to tell me about those people.
Ahem.
Ja.
This shot was taken in 1960, that  that’s almost fifty years ago by now laughs.
She would like to know a little bit about  about  about these people, a few.
Eeer.
That  what you can, if you can take out this picture, this
I can, I need to come closer to here.
We, we’ll do it later.
So that we can do later.
Let us start a little bit with what happened after the war.
If you can begin with that, what was with you after the war.
After the war?
How he met his beautiful woman.
How you met your wife.
Well, I demobilized in November 1945, and from Berlin I came to Ternovka.
That, what he said.
Er, he moved at 1945, at November 45 in Chernovka. Into Chernovka?
To Ternovka.
To a place called Chernovka.
That’s where I was born.
And eh he eh
It’s not going well, forty
Wait, wait, wait.
All this technology
Yes, yes.
It’s just fine.
OK.
Ja.
You, you returned to Chernovka.
After the army I returned to Ternovka
In 1945.
In 1945, in November.
At November forty-five, after the arm  after the army he returned to Chernovka.
There was not anyone of mine, in that [?] the Germans (had) killed.
He  nobody was left of his family, they were all killed by the, the Germans.
Ja.
I spent there two weeks, with acquaintances and [?], and then I found out that to Khoshchevato,
at thirty kilometers from Ternovka, my uncle had returned from [?].
Er, he spent, er, two weeks there with people he knew, just acquaintances,
and then he heard that  What’s the second city called?
Khoshchevato, that’s a small place.
That a place called Khachevata, which is about thirty kilometers
from Chernovka, er, er, an uncle of his returned there.
I met there Yevgeniya, she had returned from the army, also demobilized in November 1945, we
met there, fell in love with each other, and married, on January 15th, 1946 we got married.
Er, when he went there to that place, to met his uncle, he met his wife and
she also returned from the army. They met at that place at this small stack,
a small shtetl, small, and met, fell in love, and got married.
When in November?
Forty-  1945, in November 1945 she had also returned home and I met her there [?].
And you married when?
January 15th, forty-six.
And they got married at January 15, 1946.
And then?
Well, I worked in Khoshchevato as a photographer, I was, well, my hand is not able to work
otherways, I could not study after the death camp, I found a job as a photographer.
There he started working as a photographer. He says he couldn’t do
anything else, he couldn’t study anything after the, the lagers of
death, after the camps, and he found, er, a job as a photographer.
Mm [?]
Then I moved from Khoshchevato to Gayvoron, that’s a regional centre, 20,000 inhabitants,
Gayvoron. Igor Krutoy, the director Igor Krutoy was  was born in this Gayvoron.
Mm.
I worked there for twenty-five years as a manager of a photo studio, in Gayvoron.
He moved from that city, to Ga
Gay-vo-ron.
Gayvoron.
where he worked for twenty-five years as a, as a lead , er, leading photographer.
I lived there for twenty-five years. The children grew up, got married, one to Odessa, the
second married to Odessa, so we sold everything and moved also to Odessa, in 1975.
And you have two children?
Yes.
A boy and a gi
Two boys, yes.
Two boys.
He has two sons and they both married and moved to Odessa, so they sold
everything they had and also moved to Odessa, it was in 1975.
In 1975?
Yes.
1975.
And we spent fifteen years in Odessa and in ’90 we moved to here.
He they lived in Odessa fifteen years and in 1990 they moved to Israel, they came to Israel.
Mm. What made them decide, was it anti-Semitism in the Ukraine, or  what made them decide to move?
Why did you decide to move to Israel?
Er  Well, that  I had together for a long time, somewhere we must have some soil, our own soil, that
another man’s soil for all that is not ours, we decided to return to our historical motherland.
And did you feel some sort of anti-Semitism in Odessa?
Nnno, I worked for twenty-five years in Ode in Gayvoron, in Odessa the same,
there are many Jews in Odessa and the Jews felt not, not, not frustrated.
He says that he had, er, for a long time he had thoughts that the Jews have to have a place a soil
of their own and he was fiddling with that thought and eventually they decided to come and live in
the land of their ancestors, of their fathers, he says he didn’t experience any anti-Semitism,
neither in the place where he worked for twenty-five years, nor in Odessa, where he spent fifteen
years, they, he says, the jews there didn’t feel unwelcome or banned from things or
Where did he get all those
She asks  about your
Well, me, I participated after the camp, I went, but she, yesterday I told, after
the camp, Khelm, when our troops liberated Khelm, the town of Khelm in Poland, I
went to the commander and they sent me to the army. I was checked out for two weeks
by Smersh, that’s such a serious organization where they look for spies
One little second, please.
Yes.
[?] When was that?
That was in July, 1944.
And that was in Khelm?
In Khelm.
In July forty-four in Khelm, when they liberated when the, er , the Russian army
so liberated Khelm, he came to the, eeer, commanding officer and this commanding
officer sent him to the recruited, to the army, he said that he was, for two weeks
he was checked out by an organization called Smersh, was, the job was to
Investigate the spies.
OK.
Please.
And when they had been checking for two weeks and found out that I wasn’t a
Polizei, I wasn’t a traitor, they sent me to the 69th army, just then and there
in Khelm the 69th army was passing by, it was the first Russian front
Mm.
I went there to the 336th division
After they did all the authentifications and saw he wasn’t a Polizei or anything
like that, they sent him to the 69th armory, army, armory and to the 300
336th division. Of the 69th army.
[?]
OK. That was just passing through Khelm.
And you
We crossed the Visla
Mm
the Visla river
They moved over the Visla, they
Yeah.
Mm.
And there was a bridgehead, the Pulavsky bridgehead it was called, Pulava,
the town[Pulava was on that side of the Visla, and we consolidated our hold
on this bridgehead, in order to then be able to go further into attack.
Mm, they, er, settled in a platsdarm at the Visla from the other side and
Pulavsky, Pulavsky, that’s important, Pulavsky.
Pulavsky.
Allright, Pulavsky.
The Pulavsky, yes, yes, bridgehead.
The Pulavsky platsdarm.
Bridgehead.
And they, er, they had to secure it, so they could continue their
To the other army, ja.
Yes.
Er, a bridgehead, rather small,
Mm.
Thirty-five kilometers width, and le  depth, fourteen kilometers.
Forty-nine Fourteen depth and thirty-five length.
To our south on the Visla was the first Ukrainian front, there was the Sandomirsky bridgehead, the Sandomirsky,
there was a big one, hundred and five kilometers to thirty-five, but we had a small one.
And to their south there was the first Ukranian frontier, their, their
frontier was the first Russian frontier, and to their, to their south was
on, on the Visla the first Ukrainian frontier, and this was, er
How was it called?
The Sandomirsky bridgehead. Sandomir, Sandomir.
[?]
Mm. And it was a bigger one, er, one hundred  Hundred?
Hundred and five to thirty-five.
Hundred and five over thirty-five.
They went into attack. The twelfth of January, 1945, we heard cannon fire when they
went into attack. We went two days later, the fourteenth of January, 1945.
They, the, the other platsdarm, the Ukrainians, they started the, the attack on janualy, January
12th 1945, and they, their regiment, they went two days later, 14th of January 1945.
We went into attack, to Poznan.
To Poznan?
Poznan.
They went to
There is the Poznan fortress and the Germans were strongly fortified.
The, there is the, er, like a war, wall.
Ja.
Where the Germans were very strong seated.
Mm.
Aaand  the companies already laid already in order to go into attack, but the company’s commander,
first lieutenant Khlusov calls, sergeant-major Vebel is wounded and I was put in place of the
sergeant-major, he got wounded. So as to  The soldiers ran out of cartridges and grenades, so
that I on a sledge, ’t was January, yes, on a sledge fetched for them grenades and cartridges,
I took Polacks and a sledge, loaded a box with grenades and a box with cartridges and  he, the
battalion’s commander, explained to me how to get to us, to the company
Mm.
So that you got into the anti-tank trench, ten minutes
Then you get out, you go forward, and right there your company
lies. And all, I fetched all and they gave me a decoration.
Er, when they were already at the, in front of the s  er
Germans.
They, er, they got a call from the people that were, er, at the first front, that they,
the soldiers ran out of ammunition, they needed, er, er, gran , handgrenades
Grenades and ?
Cartridges.
And bullets.
Yes.
And, er, he, he had to take over a soldier that was injured, he was in a higher position
and he took, er, he took, er, er, snow, snow, er, snowskis or something like that
Yes.
Er, from a Polack, put everything armed it and his commanding officer
explained to him how to get, of this, their front, their
OK, make it shorter.
OK. And that is how he got one, of one, of the orden.
Well, and there they gave several medals, jubilee ones for the victory over
Germany, there, various jubilee ones then they were giving already
And after that they used to give in all the ceremonies the
medals for participating in the victory over the Germans.
Thank you.
And there in Poznan I got wounded.
And he was, he was, er
I made, er, I made a picture of his hand, and I’ll make
a picture of it again. Will you tell him please?
She wants, if possible, er, photograph your hand.
She already yesterday photographed (it).
She said that she knows but she wants another time.
Mmm.
OK, I make one more.
? laughs
So I want him to read this.
Mm. To the camera.
Would he, to the camera, the, the text that he just read before
Mm.
Would he mind to read it, because it will make it easier to show it, in wherever
She asks if you can read that which you wro  wrote down.
Yes I can.
And, and you don’t have to translate, because it will be translated. Tell him please.
And  besides  apart from that, this they will, it will by them, they will make a translation
litt. transmission so as to be understandable also to those who don’t know Russian.
And I’ll send him the translation, so he can use it.
And she will send you, er, the transmission if you will want with her
Thank you.
In English.
The schizophrenic Hitler and his clique – “Deutschland
ueber alles” is the basis of their call.
In that gibberish, in this gibberish the German philistine believed with the greatest ease.
From small to great they screamed “Heil”, and those who didn’t
scream “Heil” perished in the concentration camp.
And such honest Germans existed, not a few.
For this gibberish the people of the Earth paid a very high price.
Our hunted people, the people of the Thora book, paid with mountains of corpses,
and with the ashes of Dachau, Auschwitz, Treblinka, and Sobibor.
This is what you get from schizophrenic gibberish.
But the end went, the end came to the patience of our people, the
fires of the Warsaw ghetto flared up in the twinkling of an eye.
The Warsaw Jews stood firm: twenty days no fascist foot was set into the ghetto.
In the footsteps of the courageous Warsawers Sobibor death camp rose.
With axes, with knives we killed the fascists.
We tore apart the barbwire with our bare hands.
The fourteenth of October became a funeral repast for eleven fascists.
This day was for many prisoners their last one.
They gave their lives not in vain, Sobibor death camp was extinguished forever.
At our horizon an extinguished star was reborn, a star of hope, a star
of life, a star of freedom, and this star is called: Israel.
May this star shine for the Jews in all, always, always, two
thousand years we, the Jews, have waited for this day.
Well, this is dedicated to the sixty-fifth anniversary of the day of
the insurrection in Sobibor death camp, 14th of October, 1943.
On the picture to the right the leader of the insurrection, Alexandr Pechersky, who left
us on the 19th of January, 1990, in Rostov-on-Don. Blessed forever be his name.
I, the author of these words, an active participant in the insurrection, Semyon
Rozenfeld, born Ukraine, small town of Ternovka, currently live in Tel Aviv.
Did he write it?
Yes, he’s the author.
What?
He’s the author.
Why did he write it? Can you ask him?
Er, can you, she asks, why did you write this text?
Well, this tormented me, I had to speak out.
He says, er, it, eеr, it, it was in his soul, it was tormenting
him and he sa he had a need to to let it out, to tell it
I met in Berlin a lot of Germans.
Mm.
I spoke German rather well. And I even met a man, a dentist, who lived
not far away from us. I had, I had a toothache and he acquainted me
with his wife, he had for ten years hidden his wife, a Jewess.
When he was in Berlin, he met many Germans, he spoke very good German.
And he also met a dentist, who took care of his tooth, that during
the war for about ten years he, he was hiding his Jewish wife.
Mm.
Not far from Berlin there were these Ribbentrop stables, the hippodrome of Ribbentrop,
there in that place, there were many rooms and an army ration dump was organized
in these rooms, that was for  where flour, bread, was stored for the whole army,
the 69th army. I was corporal and then head of the guard of this dump.
He was, when he was in Berlin, there the, er, stables of Ribben, Ribbentrop, where the
The hippodrome, the hippodrome of Ribbentrop.
Ja.
Hippodrome, and where they kept all the supplies for his 69th army, and
he was in charge of all this area, this was what he did in Berlin.
So who is Pechersky, to the left or to the right?
This is
This is Pechersky and this is him. Er, how did he meet Pechersky?
[?] sat in the school where I studied, he finished ten classes in Ternovka school.
This is the school he studied in, in Cherno Chernovska, ten
Thank you very much.
This is me with my comrade in 1938, before, er, thirty-  1939.
This is a picture of him and his friend on
1939.
1939, before the war.
Er, er, sorry. So who are they?
And that
And, and your friends, can you tell something about them?
Left, from the left to the right.
From left to right, if you can.
Eeer, this tank crew member, tank crew member
Mm.
perished
This
forty-one.
drove a tank, died forty-one.
This one, er  was wounded and was evacuated and he, eeer, was already unfit for
the army service regime and he was saved and already lived in Central Asia.
This friend of his was injured and then evacuated, this is what saved his life.
Which one is it?
This one over here, down there, and eeer, he lived in Central Asia from that moment on.
And this one here is Misha Mazov, he  we served one year in the army,
in 1940, he found himself in a construction battalion, they built fortifications
at the border between the Soviet Union and Poland.
Mm.
And whe the war began, he was shot through his right leg and they managed to evacuate him in time.
Eeer.
And then in Tashkent he finished law school, became a lawyer.
This is, this man, Misha Mazov, he was in the army, building the frontier between the border between
Russia and Poland. And when the war started, he was injured in his leg, so they managed to evacuate
him on time to Tashkent, and then he, then he studied in Tashkent to become a lawyer.
And then the fourth one?
And this is you?
I.
Mm.
You were beautiful.
laughs
He still is.
Tell him.
You were a handsome man.
Aaa, very.
laughs
Twenty-five years here it is after the day of the insurrection, in 1968  In
1968 we gathered in Rostov and celebrated. This here is Litvinovsky, this is
Aleksey Vaytser, this is Weisspapier, this is Pechersky, and this is me.
OK, we go from the right to the left. One
This is
two, three, four, five. OK, one is?
If you
To the right.
can again
Litvinovsky, he died, he is no longer alive, he died
in Kuybishev. This is Aleksey Vaytser, who [?]. [?]
Yes
This is Arkadiy Vayspapir.
Yes, Vayspapir, yes.
This is Pechersky.
Yes  [?]
This is me.
This is him.
How did he  how did he know Pechersky?
How did you me  How did you know, you meet Pechersky?
This here is in 1992 here in Tel Aviv, in  Jerusalem, I lit a candle on Shiva day.
Er, he lit this, the Holocaust day in Jerusalem, 1992.
Wonderful.
[?]
Thank you.
Er, on Shiva, I lit there the second candle, third candle.
He lit the third candle.
But I, I’m asking, how did he meet Pechersky?
How, how did you meet Pechersky?
Eeer  That was
In Sobibor?
Neee. In Sobibor I knew him.
He already knew him in Sobibor.
I knew him in Minsk.
In Minsk.
In Minsk, Minsk (I) knew, but we were there, we were friends, only two, three men and that was
it, (we) didn’t allow more, I was friends with Sasha [?], Grisha Epshtein and that was it.
And he was friends with other guys, Shloyme Loytman, eeer, Kali Mali, Shubayev Sasha
And this was in Sobibor?
Eeer, in Sobibor, no, that’s in Minsk.
Minsk.
In Minsk.
I understand.
OK.
Understand.
Mm.
Thank you.
And in Sobibor, when we got (there), me and Sasha, we stayed alive, but the third, Grisha
Epshtein, went into the woods and we didn’t see him, and he perished somewhere there.
Mm. When they, when they, er, came to Sobibor, he and his friend Sasha remained there, but the third
friend, Grisha, they sent him away and they haven’t seen him since. He probably died somewhere.
The 14th of October I knew that something was being prepared, but that was strictly secret.
The 14th of October he came to the carpenter’s workshop, they left me at the carpenter’s
(workshop), so, I didn’t work as a carpenter, I  built barracks.
Mm.
He came to the carpenter’s workshop, they left me also on the 14th of October after
lunch, they left (me) in the carpenter’s workshop. He took me aside, he says, Frenzel
is to come at four o’clock to fetch a cupboard that is being made to his order. Can
you kill him with an axe? I say, Yes, (he:) Well, prepare yourselves.
One little second, I, eeer
Let’s get on.
He says, he knew that something was going on, but it was all top secret, and
on, er, October 14th Pechersky came to him, he was working at the, at the
workshop and he told, and he came to the workshop and told him that
Who must come?
Frenzel [?]?
Frenzel, [?] Frenzel.
Frenzel is about, need to come and pick up a, er, a
A coat.
Something, a cloth or something.
Ja.
Can you kill him with an axe, and he said, yes I can.
From this, from the window of this carpenter’s workshop, (we) chose especially this, er, carpenter’s
workshop, so that from there would be visible the entry to the cobbler’s workshop, where Shubayev
and still another one were standing. The entry to that cobbler’s (workshop) were standing Arkadiy
Wayspapir and Loytman, in the tailor’s workshop Shubayev and yet with another one. Patsebulshky
they put in the second camp, there four Germans worked, and he had to kill them.
And all this sss, and during one hour, from four till five on the 14th of October.
And they picked this, er, special place, this place in the workshop, because it was very
comfortable, because they could see the, whoever was coming from the Germans and, er,
he told me about other friends of his that were situated in different places and
were not been prepared. Cause I don’t really remember I have to ask him
OK
over again.
It’s OK.
And, er, he said that all the killing of the Germans had to take place during
one hour between four and five in the afternoon on October 14th.
There, into the cobbler’s and tailor’s (workshops)
the Germans came, and there they dealt with them.
Mm.
Frenzel didn’t come to the carpenter’s (workshop),
they sent him somewhere for an urgent cause. He then
Frenzel, Frenzel didn’t come to the workshop, he was sent away to
Therefore, I didn’t fulfil the task, but Pechersky didn’t mind, he
says, because of one swine we won’t lo  lose the insurrection.
He, he didn’t, he was, he didn’t, because Frenzel didn’t come, he couldn’t
kill him, but Pechersky said, for one German we will not stop the, the
Revolt.
The revolt.
At five o’clock, when Patsebulshky came from there, from the second camp, singing, already there
that the Dutchmen also worked in the second camp, he comes with songs and that means, means, that
he killed four Germans, Shubayev, Shagal, Patsebulshky comes with songs, he took out his pistol, fired
into the air, yelled, For the Motherland, for Stalin, forward! And we started running.
At five o’clock
I understood.
OK.
I ran with the axe to the barbwire behind [?] premises and wanted to chop off the wire,
I didn’t succeed, I dropped the axe, climbed over the wire, three-meter fence and a short
run (across) into the forest, in the forest I felt, in my leg something hurts, I looked,
there a bullet had torn its way through the flesh, I didn’t pay attention.
He run over to the fence with an axe, the wired fence, and tried to open the door
And he climbed over.
And he climbed over, and then at, at the forest he felt that something was,
er, bothering him, and he was hu  he saw that he had a bullet in his leg.
There on that spot where we had made it to the woods, there were about fifty people,
they had ran to other places, but they all the same ran up lumping together, and there,
where we were, fifty people, we went for twenty-four hours all together.
Er, he, they got to a point in the woods, er, at a certain point there were fifty people,
but many others escaped to different directions, but his group, where he was, there
were fifty of them, and for twenty-four hours they were walking together.
Mm.
We de  we understood, that this way, fifty people, we won’t
be able to hide, we must split up into small groups.
They understood that they had to separate into smaller groups.
We split up, I more to Freyberg and Ramler, he died two years ago, and
we walked on and came to Khelm, five kilometers from Khelm in the woods
we met two brothers, who had escaped from the pogrom in Khelm.
Er, they, he and his friend walked to, walked towards
Khelm.
Khelm, and about five kilometers from Khelm they met
two, er, two guys, who escaped the pogrom in Khelm.
And that he has already told yesterday, so let’s cut it short.
OK.
Can you tell him?
Cut it short to where? What would you like
We stop here.
OK.
Because he already did, told at the other time.
OK, this, this, this, this part in, and the rest, this is what you already told ye
Yes, yes.
Yes.
And I don’t want to burden him today.
She, she doesn’t want that you too much
No, no, it’s hard for me
So, no need if you already told.
I told, yes, yes.
So.
So can we now look at the picture of 1946 and get that off him, please?
So, now, if possible
What does she want to know from this?
What would you like to know from this picture?
I’m first going to make a photograph. Yes. So those
are all survivors of  who came back to his village?
This is a memorial we made from our own money, we collected, this
is how we, when we come together, the 27th of May, 1924
All these, this, stayed
These are survivors who were evacuated.
From you, from your
Who?
shtetl?
Yes, yes. These people are all from Ternovka, all
All from, er, Cher, Chernovitz, Che, Chernovitz?
Yes, Ternovka.
Ter.
Ternovka.
OK.
And to whom was he closest?
And your, you most close here, who were ?
Mm, here I don’t have anyone, no one.
Nobody from
They all rest here.
This is, this is a memorial they built, they, from, by the, own, from their
own money, and he says that all that where close to him are buried here.
But he knows all the people on the picture?
But you know everyone.
I know everyone.
Yes.
Can he talk a little bit
about what
I can, I can give names, but after all that makes no sense, ta
He says that
I know everyone.
He knows everyone, but it’s
With this one here I studied in one class, Moyne Kremer.
With this one he was
Yes.
in the same class.
Wait, about whom  more of him
Moyne Kremer.
Money Kremer.
The man in the middle of this picture was in the same
class. Can you calculate a little bit SpSL him?
What can you say about him?
What I  How would I know (him), we would meet only at the 27th of May
for one day and then we would part, everyone his own way, for me
[?] know they only got together once a year and then
I know he worked as a teacher.
He knows he was working as a teacher.
Ahem.
Yes. This is Shunkel [?], this is his cousine, this, I know all of them, but I already forgot
their names. This  eeer, my classmate, he perished, eeer, perished after the war.
The, this one
Yes, Umansky.
Died after the war.
Died after the war, yes.
Mm.
Yes, so I don’t  already forgot.
And even
What are their names.
[?] he already all their names.
Mm.
These are old people, they died already long ago.
These are old people, who died a long time ago.
OK, is there anything else he wants to [?]? He has talked me today and yesterday.
She asks, if there is still something more that you might want to tell, to show
No(thing) more.
You already told
No(thing) more, I told you, in principle, everything.
He says
Everything.
He says that he told you everything and
Thank you very much.
You’re welcome  here